Move Catalan Section (#4673)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/6_Advanced/Catalan.mdx

For example, there are $C_4=14$ paths in a $4 \times 4 grid$:

![lattice points](./assets/catalan-lattice-paths.png)

The next two examples are a bit more niche, but they're still interesting to think about.

Consider a convex polygon with $n+2$ sides divided into $n$ triangles by connecting vertices with non-intersecting lines.
The number of different ways to divide the polygon in this way is equal to $C_n$.

Here's the particular case for $n=3$ in which we have $C_3=5$:

![polygons](./assets/catalan-polygons.png)

$C_n$ is also equal to the number of [mountain ranges](https://mathcircle.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/BMC6/pdf0607/catalan.pdf#page=2) of length $2n$ consisting of $n$ upstrokes and $n$ downstrokes.

![mountains](./assets/catalan-mountain-strokes.png)

# Bracket Sequences I

<FocusProblem problem="sample" />

## Explanation

The problem is a direct application of Catalan numbers. The answer for $N$ is the $N/2$ Catalan Number.

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \cdot \log{N})$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

int main() {

> 	const int MOD = 1e9 + 7;

Author: done

	int N;

> 	cin >> N;

Author: done

> 	if (N & 1) {

Author: done

		cout << 0;
		return 0;
	}

	auto exp = [&](int x, int y) -> int {
		int ans = 1, aux = x;
		for (int i = 0; (1LL << i) <= y; i++) {
			if ((1LL << i) & y) { ans = 1LL * ans * aux % MOD; }
			aux = 1LL * aux * aux % MOD;
		}
		return ans;
	};

	auto inv = [&](int x) -> int { return exp(x, MOD - 2); };

	auto fact = [&](int x) -> int {
		int ans = 1;
		for (int i = 1; i <= x; i++) { ans = 1LL * ans * i % MOD; }
		return ans;
	};

	auto comb = [&](int n, int k) {
		return 1LL * fact(n) * inv(fact(k)) % MOD * inv(fact(n - k)) % MOD;

> 	};

Author: done

![lattice points](./assets/catalan-lattice-paths.png)

The next two examples are a bit more niche, but they're still interesting to think about.

Consider a convex polygon with $n+2$ sides divided into $n$ triangles by connecting vertices with non-intersecting lines.
The number of different ways to divide the polygon in this way is equal to $C_n$.

Here's the particular case for $n=3$ in which we have $C_3=5$:

![polygons](./assets/catalan-polygons.png)

$C_n$ is also equal to the number of [mountain ranges](https://mathcircle.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/BMC6/pdf0607/catalan.pdf#page=2) of length $2n$ consisting of $n$ upstrokes and $n$ downstrokes.

![mountains](./assets/catalan-mountain-strokes.png)

# Bracket Sequences I

<FocusProblem problem="sample" />

## Explanation

The problem is a direct application of Catalan numbers. The answer for $N$ is the $N/2$ Catalan Number.

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \cdot \log{N})$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

const int MOD = 1e9 + 7;
const int MAXN = 1e6;

long long fac[MAXN + 1];
long long inv[MAXN + 1];

/** @return x^n modulo m in O(log p) time. */

> long long exp(long long x, long long n, long long m) {

Reviewer: wrap this stuff and the other stuff in a codesnip
call it uh
```
Combinatorics Functions (from the module)
```

Author: alright done

---
id: catalan
title: 'Catalan Numbers'
author: Mihnea Brebenel
description: ''
prerequisites:
  - combo
frequency: 1
---

<Resources>
	<Resource
		source="cp-algo"
		title="Catalan Numbers"
		url="https://cp-algorithms.com/combinatorics/catalan-numbers.html"
		starred
	>
		Well documented article.
	</Resource>
</Resources>

The [Catalan numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catalan_number) are a sequence of positive integers that can be very useful in counting problems in combinatorics.

> The $n$-th Catalan can be expressed as following using binomial coeffiecients:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The $n$-th Catalan can be expressed as follows using binomial coefficients:
```

Author: ok

$$
C_n=\frac{1}{n+1}\cdot \binom{2n}{n}=\frac{(2n)!}{(n+1)!\,n!}
$$

They also have the recurrence formula
$$
C_{n+1}= \sum^{n}_{i=0}{C_i \cdot C_{n-i}} \,\,\, \text{ for } n \ge 0 \\
$$
which can also be expressed as
$$
C_n=\frac{2(2n-1)}{n+1} \cdot C_{n-1}
$$

The first $5$ Catalan numbers are

<center>

| n | 0| 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 |
|---| -| - | - | - | - | - |
| $C_n$| 1 | 1 | 2 | 5 | 14| 42 |

</center>

# Applications

The Catalan numbers can be used to represent a wide variety of things.

For example, $C_n$ is equal to the number of valid parenthesis expressions of length $2n$.
Take, for instance, $C_3=5$:
* `()()()`
* `(())()`
* `()(())`
* `((()))`
* `(()())`

It's also equal to the number of full binary trees with $n+1$ leaves.
The following image shows the $5$ binary trees with $4$ leaves:

![binary-trees](./assets/catalan-binary-trees.png)

$C_n$ is also the number of monotonic lattice paths along the edges of a $n \times n$ grid that don't pass above the diagonal.
The paths start in the lower left corner and ends in the upper right corner.

> For example, there are $C_4=14$ paths in a $4 \times 4 grid$:

Reviewer 2: grid should not be in `$...$`

Author: yep

> ![lattice points](./assets/catalan-lattice-paths.png)

Reviewer 3: i think there was a github issue/comment about this, but the bottom left image is wrong

could you fix it? or i can do some image editing lol

Author: Solved
<img width="139" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/45285f82-5a03-461d-8834-9f99706f26e7">

The next two examples are a bit more niche, but they're still interesting to think about.

Consider a convex polygon with $n+2$ sides divided into $n$ triangles by connecting vertices with non-intersecting lines.
The number of different ways to divide the polygon in this way is equal to $C_n$.

Here's the particular case for $n=3$ in which we have $C_3=5$:

![polygons](./assets/catalan-polygons.png)

$C_n$ is also equal to the number of [mountain ranges](https://mathcircle.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/BMC6/pdf0607/catalan.pdf#page=2) of length $2n$ consisting of $n$ upstrokes and $n$ downstrokes.

![mountains](./assets/catalan-mountain-strokes.png)

# Bracket Sequences I

<FocusProblem problem="sample" />

## Explanation

The problem is a direct application of Catalan numbers. The answer for $N$ is the $N/2$ Catalan Number.

## Implementation

> **Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \cdot \log{N})$

Reviewer 2: isn't it $O(N)$?

Author: ok

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

const int MOD = 1e9 + 7;
const int MAXN = 1e6;

long long fac[MAXN + 1];
long long inv[MAXN + 1];

// BeginCodeSnip{Combinatorics Functions (from the module)}
/** @return x^n modulo m in O(log p) time. */
long long exp(long long x, long long n, long long m) {
	x %= m;  // note: m * m must be less than 2^63 to avoid ll overflow
	long long res = 1;
	while (n > 0) {
		if (n % 2 == 1) { res = res * x % m; }
		x = x * x % m;
		n /= 2;
	}
	return res;
}

/** Precomputes n! from 0 to MAXN. */
void factorial(long long p) {
	fac[0] = 1;
	for (int i = 1; i <= MAXN; i++) { fac[i] = fac[i - 1] * i % p; }
}

/**
 * Precomputes all modular inverse factorials
 * from 0 to MAXN in O(n + log p) time
 */
void inverses(long long p) {
	inv[MAXN] = exp(fac[MAXN], p - 2, p);
	for (int i = MAXN; i >= 1; i--) { inv[i - 1] = inv[i] * i % p; }
}

/** @return nCr mod p */
long long choose(long long n, long long r, long long p) {
	return fac[n] * inv[r] % p * inv[n - r] % p;
}
// EndCodeSnip

int main() {
	long long n;
	cin >> n;

	if (n % 2) {

> 		cout << 0;

Reviewer: here too

Author: yep

		return 0;
	}

	factorial(MOD);
	inverses(MOD);

> 	cout << exp(n / 2 + 1, MOD - 2, MOD) * choose(n, n / 2, MOD) % MOD;

Reviewer: endl here

Author: yep

}
```

</CPPSection>
</LanguageSection>

> 

Reviewer 3: add problems header

Author: ok
